verified_boot_app_spec.md: Add implementation specification (#31)
3mdeb/verified-boot: verified_boot_app_spec.md

> # Verified Boot Provisioning Wizard UEFI Application

Reviewer: ```suggestion
# Sovereign Boot Provisioning Wizard UEFI Application
```

Reviewer: Let's use that term as we agreed in other discussion.

Author: Changed to Soverign

## 1. Introduction

This document specifies the behavior and architecture of a UEFI application
designed to guide end users through the provisioning of UEFI Secure Boot.
The objective is to offer a user-controllable mechanism for managing
platform trust relationships and establishing Secure Boot infrastructure,
with a primary focus on transparency, informed consent, and usability.

Unlike traditional firmware interfaces, which expose Secure Boot as a
collection of loosely connected toggleable settings and unmanaged
certificate stores, this application presents a coherent, wizard-like
experience. Its purpose is to make the process of reviewing and enrolling
platform keys intuitive for users who are not security experts, while
ensuring strict adherence to the [UEFI Specification Version

> 2.7](https://uefi.org/specifications).

Reviewer: How will we test that? We should be as close to upstream as possible for very long-term maintenance, which is not said to be needed, but that could lead to compatibility issues. OTOH, the necessary API does not change that often. To make it more concrete, maybe we should stick to 2.3.1 because that is mandated by MSFT Secure Boot certification, and 90%+ of the hardware we will deal with will meet that requirement. Also, we don't know anything about the spec.

My problem is that no suite will confirm compliance (SCT is outdated). I know there is some work on improvements. Maybe even some new compliance suite coming.

So maybe let's not decide about spec version or start to comply with what is expected by MSFT Secure Boot: https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/windows-hardware/design/device-experiences/oem-secure-boot

Also, if we link to some version, let's link to that version, e.g., https://uefi.org/sites/default/files/resources/2.3.1_D.pdf

Author: > So maybe let's not decide about spec version or start to comply with what is expected by MSFT Secure Boot:

Every UEFI image provides information about minimal UEFI version it can be run on.

Also UEFI 2.3.1 does not specify AuditMode, which will probably be essential for the application to remove the PK during the trusted key database modification.

@pietrushnic do we test our Dasharo firmware for any UEFI compliance? Is Tianocore 100% tested against compliance? How do you plan on testing compliance on something that has not been tested against compliance? Chicken and egg problem.

FYI Tianocore advertises UEFI 2.7... 

Anyways, I don't like this sentence too:

`while ensuring strict adherence to the [UEFI Specification Version 2.7](https://uefi.org/specifications).`

And I will change that.

Reviewer: > > So maybe let's not decide about spec version or start to comply with what is expected by MSFT Secure Boot:
> 
> Every UEFI image provides information about minimal UEFI version it can be run on.
> 
> Also UEFI 2.3.1 does not specify AuditMode, which will probably be essential for the application to remove the PK during the trusted key database modification.
> 
> @pietrushnic do we test our Dasharo firmware for any UEFI compliance? Is Tianocore 100% tested against compliance? How do you plan on testing compliance on something that has not been tested against compliance? Chicken and egg problem.

@miczyg1, we don't test, but we would like; there is simply no way to test. If there is no test, then we should not have strong claims.

Tianocore has resources at least to try something, and yes, I don't think they thoroughly test because that is "value added" by IBV.

My point is not to claim compliance, where we can not prove it. If you have to stick to something, then let's give a better argument. I proposed a link to the MSFT requirements, but your argument about Audit Mode is also good.

> 
> FYI Tianocore advertises UEFI 2.7...
> 
> Anyways, I don't like this sentence too:
> 
> `while ensuring strict adherence to the [UEFI Specification Version 2.7](https://uefi.org/specifications).`
> 
> And I will change that.

Thanks.

Author: Sentence was dropped already

## 2. Application Design Overview

On first launch (i.e., when no Platform Key (`PK`) is enrolled and), the
application checks if Secure Boot is enabled (i.e., when Platform Key (`PK`)
is enrolled), if yes, it attempts to transition to `AuditMode`. Not enrolled
`PK` is the prerequisite to modify Secure Boot variables and establish
user-controlled trust relationships with the firmware. Then the application
begins the scanning and discovery process. It performs key discovery,
bootloader verification, and presents the user with a sequence of trust

> decisions.

Reviewer: It asks itself about the diagram, I think @DaniilKl did a good job here: https://beta.blog.3mdeb.com/2025/2025-05-20-ram-wipe/
Although I prefer programmatically drawn diagrams like PlantUML, maybe we can keep consistency using draw.io?

@DaniilKl, can you confirm what you used for those diagrams? Those look consistent. Did you hand-draw those?

Author: Confirmed to be draw.io hand-drawn

The Verified Boot Provisioning Wizard is a standalone UEFI application
executed either from a system firmware image or from an EFI System
Partition (ESP). It operates in the pre-boot UEFI environment, executing
under `EFI_BOOT_MODE == BOOT_WITH_DEFAULT_SETTINGS` or
`BOOT_WITH_MFG_MODE_SETTINGS`, or as a fallback mechanism when Secure Boot

> verification fails.

Reviewer: We have decisions regarding where the application will be placed and how it will be run (initial boot, first application). We should include that in the text and remove alternatives.

Author: Updated to reflect recent decisions.

Upon launch, the application initializes required protocols and services,
including but not limited to:

* `EFI_SIMPLE_FILE_SYSTEM_PROTOCOL` for accessing ESPs
* `EFI_LOADED_IMAGE_PROTOCOL` for self-inspection

> * `EFI_VARIABLE_SERVICES_PROTOCOL` for interaction with Secure Boot databases

Reviewer: The term `Secure Boot` is vague; wherever it is applicable, please use `UEFI Secure Boot` as the mechanism defined by the UEFI Forum and `Soverign Boot` as the mechanism described by the spec we are writing and `Soverign Boot Wizard` as the application implementation we discuss in this document.

Author: `Soverign Boot` still uses Secure Boot, what should I change here?

Reviewer: Do not use `Secure Boot`, but `UEFI Secure Boot` where it applies. Or mention at the beginning that those terms are used interchangeably and mean the same.

Author: Changed to UEFI Secure Boot everywhere

>   (`PK`, `KEK`, `db`, `dbx`) and boot option configuration

Reviewer: Mentioning databases and keys is redundant IMHO, we can easily get that PK is not a database, and we miss `dbt` and `dbr`.

Author: Yes, can be dropped

Author: Dropped already

* `EFI_SECURITY_ARCH_PROTOCOL`/`EFI_SECURITY2_ARCH_PROTOCOL` for verifying
  images via `EFI_BOOT_SERVICES.LoadImage()`

The application executes in several stages, forming a wizard workflow. These
stages include environment scanning, key discovery, signature validation,

> and key enrollment.

Reviewer: Again application lifecycle diagram would be useful.

Author: App flow has been added.

focused on system provisioning, while providing full transparency and
control afterward.

## 3. Operational Phases

### 3.1 Environment Initialization

The application can only run before `EFI_BOOT_SERVICES.ExitBootServices()` has
been called.

Upon entry, the application uses `EFI_BOOT_SERVICES.LocateHandleBuffer()` with
`ByProtocol` for `EFI_SIMPLE_FILE_SYSTEM_PROTOCOL`, identifying all connected
ESP-capable volumes. Each volume is queried via `OpenVolume()` to explore file
systems for Secure Boot material and bootloaders.

### 3.2 Key Discovery on Filesystems and Default Variables

In this phase, the application scans all discovered ESPs for files that may
contain usable public keys and certificates. It searches recursively for
files with known cryptographic formats such as `.cer`, `.der`, or `.key`,
using simple heuristics and file extension matching.

Each candidate file is parsed using an internal X.509 ASN.1 parser. For
every successfully decoded certificate or public key, the application
extracts metadata such as:

* Subject Common Name (CN) and Organization (O)
* Issuer CN and O
* Validity period
* Key type and size

> * Fingerprint (SHA-256, optionally SHA-1)

Reviewer: We don't have to enumerate that. It is not essential for the design, IMHO. Also, there are higher SHAs supported by the reference implementation (384 and 512), so there may be more things happening inside.

I believe that sooner or later, we will get a request for ECC or PGP.

Let's simplify by not enumerating things we get from something already implemented. Let's focus on things we will implement.

Author: Agree

Author: Removed enumeration. Key discovery has also been moved to future ideas.

These keys are collected into a staging list of potential trust
anchors.

In addition to filesystem-based discovery, the application also examines
Secure Boot default variables:

* `PKDefault`
* `KEKDefault`
* `dbDefault`
* `dbxDefault`

These variables contain OEM-provided default certificates typically
embedded in firmware. If available, these are decoded and added to the
staging list of candidate keys. The application retains the source context
(e.g., default variable name) for each key, allowing the user to
distinguish between OEM defaults and filesystem-provided certificates.
This list is kept in memory until the user is prompted to accept or reject
trust for each key during later provisioning steps. The application
maintains source metadata (e.g., filesystem path and originating

> partition) to aid user decision-making.

Reviewer: Do I understand correctly, we would like to provide something like a viewer/explorer of PK/KEK/db/dbx/dbr/dbt?

Author: Viewer for keys that are present on external sources like disks.

But display of the key source in the menu is being rejected, so probably will be dropped...

Reviewer: Ok, we should consider that for future versions.

Author: Has been dropped. Resolving.

> ### 3.3 Bootloader Identification and Verification Using Audit Log

Reviewer: We should already create a section "Future ideas" and move this section there.

Author: This is not a future idea but an integral part of the application.

Reviewer: Yes, you explained that directly to me, but it is not clear from this document. Also, we don't plan to use Audit Mode "as-is" but rather leverage its code to benefit Sovereign Boot. Let's mention how we will use it, and I'm good.

Author: I have started dropping AuditMode already from the file.

Author: AuditMode completely dropped.

inspects each entry, extracting:

* The EFI image device path
* Status of image verification
* Signature list used during verification attempts
* Associated certificates

This audit log is cross-referenced with the key discovery results from
section 3.2 to establish which keys failed verification and why. Bootloader
paths from the table are parsed and presented to the user together with
verification outcomes and certificate metadata.

The application also validates bootloaders using
`EFI_BOOT_SERVICES.LoadImage()`. This ensures that bootloaders not captured in
the audit log are still evaluated if located on accessible filesystems. The
firmware will put the ifnormation abotu execution attempt and verification
checks in the `EFI_IMAGE_EXECUTION_INFO_TABLE`. The application will consult
its content to present the results.

Bootloaders that pass signature checks using discovered or pre-enrolled keys
are listed for potential trust decisions. For images with unknown but
verifiable keys, the application initiates a trust prompt as described in
the next section.

### 3.4 Trust Decision and Key Enrollment

For each unknown signing key discovered during verification, the application

> prompts the user with a detailed summary, including:

Reviewer: How annoying would it be if 10, 20, or 50 keys were discovered? Do we have some ideas on how to deal with potential volume?

Author: And what can we possibly do with that?

Our case seem to be that you are booting the machine for the first time. No OS whatsoever. Just a stick with an OS installer. How many keys may there be? Do we really think about 20 or 50?

It also seems that the goal is to look at the `BOOTx64.efi` (wherever it is) and present these keys. Distro maintainers say that `BOOTX64.EFI` is signed by a single key to avoid problems with broken EFI implementation.

Reviewer 2: > Our case seem to be that you are booting the machine for the first time. No OS whatsoever. Just a stick with an OS installer. How many keys may there be? Do we really think about 20 or 50?

Anecdotally, someone recently threw together [a bootable USB image with 49 different OSes](https://www.reddit.com/r/linux/comments/1kl4z9d/multiboot_usb_with_49_liveisos_retro_crt_theme/) on it. More to the point, someone somewhere will probably end up with 20 or more keys being offered to them with this approach, since there's nothing preventing a user from putting 20 or more bootloaders on one drive and people have reasons to do all sorts of weird things. Even in a more realistic scenario though, a bootable disk might reasonably have multiple keys on it, and if that happens should the user really have to make a decision to trust or distrust all of them before looking at the available bootloaders? That could be frustrating.

> And what can we possibly do with that?

A couple of ideas come to mind:

* Enumerate the available keys, but don't present them to the user right away. Once the keys are enumerated, enumerate the available bootloaders, sort them according to their priority (how to implement prioritization is something we can think about later), and determine which keys correspond to which images. Then pick whatever the "first" bootloader in the prioritized list is, and prompt the user to trust just the key that bootloader is signed with. (Or if there's more than one key signing that bootloader, then pick one of the keys to prompt the user with, preferably not Microsoft's key, if that happens to be one of the involved keys). That way the user doesn't see anything except what they absolutely have to in order to get the system to boot safely.
* Enumerate the available keys, put them into a list, sort/prioritize them somehow, then display the list to the user and allow them to pick which keys to trust. This would be nice for advanced users, but is probably still too much information for a technically unskilled user.

Reviewer: @miczyg1, what @ArrayBolt3 is precisely what I was thinking about, enumeration and letting the user know with the volume of components it would deal with. Adding filtering/searching/sorting is just UI/UX improvement, which would be nice.

The request here is not to throw everything at the user once, but rather to warn about the size of the problem and give a tool for dealing with it. Advanced dealing with volume may be a future idea.

Author: > Then pick whatever the "first" bootloader in the prioritized list is, and prompt the user to trust just the key that bootloader is signed with. (Or if there's more than one key signing that bootloader, then pick one of the keys to prompt the user with, preferably not Microsoft's key, if that happens to be one of the involved keys). That way the user doesn't see anything except what they absolutely have to in order to get the system to boot safely.

The app_flow diagram is already depicting that approach. So the app will look only on the bootloaders in the boot order prepared by the firmware, one by one, stopping when user decides to trust the key and continue boot.

Reviewer 2: That sounds good to me. The text of the spec seemed to imply previously that it was going to throw every key at the user first before even looking at bootloaders though. I assume that's not the case, and I may also have just misread it.

Reviewer 3: https://github.com/3mdeb/verified-boot/blob/6b673b99e1495ecdf62151da162b5f03e15a45e8/images/app_flow.png looks good to me.

Author: > The text of the spec seemed to imply previously that it was going to throw every key at the user first before even looking at bootloaders though. I assume that's not the case, and I may also have just misread it.

That's no longer the case. Each key will be processed one-by-one and only one time. Trust decisions will be cached so that if the same key is encountered for different bootloader, it will not be prompted again. But this also means that if there are multiple bootloaders signed by the same key, some bootloaders may be omitted (assuming they don't have other signatures).

* Key path
* Certificate subject and issuer fields (if available)
* Key fingerprint (SHA-256)
* Origin (ESP, firmware default, audit log)

With explicit user consent, the application enrolls the key into the `db`
database using `SetVariable()`. Since the application operates in either
Audit Mode or Setup Mode, authenticated write access is not required.

Only the `db` (permitted image signers) may be updated during this phase.
The `KEK` is not modified unless the user explicitly chooses to enroll
Microsoft's default keys. No changes to `PK` are performed until the end
of the provisioning workflow. This restriction ensures that the platform's
trust anchors and ownership state are not altered prematurely.

At the end of the provisioning workflow, if no Platform Key (`PK`) is
present, the user is prompted to select a key for initial ownership. This
key may be one of the previously trusted certificates or a new key
supplied specifically for the purpose of establishing platform ownership.
The application then sets the `PK` using authenticated variable services and
enables Secure Boot by setting `SetupMode = 0` and `SecureBootEnable = 1`, as

> specified in §32.3.1 of the UEFI Specification.

Reviewer: Can we simplify the flow if the user knows which key to trust?

Author: `The application then sets`

It is not visible to the user, so I don't se a reason to simply that. Also simplification will mean no action here? Keep the Secure Boto disabled and whole system insecure?

Maybe you also want to join this thread for discussion, because looks related: https://github.com/3mdeb/verified-boot/pull/30/files#r2106885671

Reviewer: My comment is refering to:

> (...) user is prompted to select a key for initial ownership. This
key may be one of the previously trusted certificates or a new key
supplied specifically for the purpose of establishing platform ownership.

If there are a lot of keys e.g., 10, we may want to provide a way to point to the one user cares about, but maybe that is a UI/UX thing for the future, since discussing how it would work may distract us.

Author: I guess the answer is already here: https://github.com/3mdeb/verified-boot/pull/31#discussion_r2107909267

Similar problem has been mentioned.

stages include environment scanning, key discovery, signature validation,
and key enrollment.

![](images/app_flow.png)

Only after the Secure Boot environment is provisioned and a Platform Key is
set does the application default to the interactive menu interface on
subsequent invocations. This ensures a streamlined initial experience
focused on system provisioning, while providing full transparency and
control afterward.

## 3. Operational Phases

### 3.1 Environment Initialization

The application can only run before `EFI_BOOT_SERVICES.ExitBootServices()` has
been called.

Upon entry, the application uses `EFI_BOOT_SERVICES.LocateHandleBuffer()` with
`ByProtocol` for `EFI_SIMPLE_FILE_SYSTEM_PROTOCOL`, identifying all connected
ESP-capable volumes. Each volume is queried via `OpenVolume()` to explore file
systems for Secure Boot material and bootloaders.

### 3.2 Key Discovery on Filesystems and Default Variables

In this phase, the application scans all discovered ESPs for files that may
contain usable public keys and certificates. It searches recursively for
files with known cryptographic formats such as `.cer`, `.der`, or `.key`,

> using simple heuristics and file extension matching.

Reviewer 2: This worries me a bit, since theoretically there could be other applications in the ESP that could store files beginning with one of these extensions in the ESP for non-boot-related use (i.e. imagine some antivirus software that needs to do signature checks for some reason and decides shipping a .der file in `\EFI\fancyantivirus\keys\db-pubkey.der` is a good idea). We probably don't want the user to ever see that key. It might be better to have a dedicated file type that would contain all boot-related certificates, which could be unambiguously identified via a magic number, perhaps?

Author: Well, we may simply take the key from the signature in the image. No need to scan the keys at all, to be honest.

This will probably be dropped as well, because the flow already evolved and probably won't implement it.

Reviewer 2: That would make very good sense to me. I didn't know whether or not the entire public key was embedded in the image or not, but if it is, then that's ideal.

Author: Embedded Signatures in PE/COFF images have a list of certificates appended at the end of file:

![image](https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/16cd2937-db00-49e4-8898-5b18c3846ed7)

Author: Key file scanning and discovery has been moved to future ideas.

using are listed for potential trust decisions. For images with unknown but
verifiable keys, the application initiates a trust prompt as described in the
next section.

The information about the bootloader should include:

* The EFI image device path
* Status of image verification
* Signature list used during verification attempts
* Associated certificates/keys

### 3.4 Trust Decision and Key Enrollment

For each unknown signing key discovered during verification, the application
prompts the user with a detailed summary, including:

* Key path
* Certificate subject and issuer fields (if available)
* Key fingerprint (SHA-256)
* Origin (ESP, firmware default, audit log)

With explicit user consent, the application enrolls the key into the `db`
database using `SetVariable()`. Since the application operates in either
Audit Mode or Setup Mode, authenticated write access is not required.

Only the `db` (permitted image signers) may be updated during this phase.
The `KEK` is not modified unless the user explicitly chooses to enroll
Microsoft's default keys. No changes to `PK` are performed until the end
of the provisioning workflow. This restriction ensures that the platform's

> trust anchors and ownership state are not altered prematurely.

Reviewer 2: When is the KEK set when not using Microsoft's default keys? I was under the impression it was mandatory for Secure Boot to work at all, since it was what signed the db, and was signed by the PK.

Author: KEK defines authorized certificates/keys that are allowed to update the databases (all `db*` variables). KEK is intended to be used by the OS, to give OS the possibility to update db or dbx when some revocations must happen.

KEK is not required for Secure Boot to work.

Reviewer 2: Oh really? I did not know that. So basically the key is needed to update the variables (unless you flush the PK first), but it isn't used to verify that whatever is in the variables already is good?

Author: > but it isn't used to verify that whatever is in the variables already is good?

All Secure Boot variables can be read freely. So their content can be verified by any entity.

At the end of the provisioning workflow, if no Platform Key (`PK`) is
present, the user is prompted to select a key for initial ownership. This
key may be one of the previously trusted certificates or a new key
supplied specifically for the purpose of establishing platform ownership.
The application then sets the `PK` using authenticated variable services and
enables Secure Boot by setting `SetupMode = 0` and `SecureBootEnable = 1`, as

> specified in the UEFI Specification.

Reviewer 2: I think this contradicts with the app flow specified by app_flow.png - isn't the PK ephemeral? Or is this initial ownership key not the PK?

Author: Yes, I haven't completely cleaned up the text to match diagram yet

Author: Text updated. Now it describes the ephemeral key concept.

| Subject: CN=shim Loader, O=Linux Foundation                |
| Issuer:  CN=Microsoft UEFI CA                              |
| Fingerprint: SHA256:1ACD34...                              |
| Source: SATA SSD #1 ESP, /EFI/keys/shim.cer                |
+------------------------------------------------------------+
|   This key is not currently trusted.                       |
|                                                            |
| [Trust This Key]                                           |
+------------------------------------------------------------+
```

### 6.4 Bootloaders and Verification Status

```
+------------------------------------------------------------+
|   Bootloaders and Verification Status                      |
+------------------------------------------------------------+
| > SATA SSD #1 ESP: /EFI/ubuntu/grubx64.efi                 |
|     Verified (Key 4)                                       |
| > NVMe0n1p1: /EFI/Microsoft/Boot/bootmgfw.efi              |
|     Failed                                                 |
| > SATA SSD #1 ESP: /EFI/boot/bootx64.efi                   |
|     Verified (Key 3)                                       |

> +------------------------------------------------------------+

Reviewer 2: There might not be a good way to express this in the mockups, but I think the user should be able to do something like select "Key 4" with arrows or the tab key, then press "Enter" to see the key details for that key. That way a user can say "ok, this is an Ubuntu image, let's double-check that this is really signed by a key with Canonical's fingerprint... ok, it is, so this is good", rather than having to figure out that "Key 4" is Canonical's key in a different menu and then using that memory elsewhere.

This gives me a potentially cool UI idea also; since we can't trust certificate names and owners, but we *can* trust the user, what if we let users assign names to keys? Then they could name "Key 4" something like "Canonical", and then see "Verified (Canonical)" here. They'd have to do a key fingerprint comparison and then manually name the key before that would work. Maybe this wizard won't ever show up often enough for that to be worth the trouble, but if people do end up spending a lot of time in here, that might help.

Reviewer: > There might not be a good way to express this in the mockups, but I think the user should be able to do something like select "Key 4" with arrows or the tab key, then press "Enter" to see the key details for that key. That way a user can say "ok, this is an Ubuntu image, let's double-check that this is really signed by a key with Canonical's fingerprint... ok, it is, so this is good", rather than having to figure out that "Key 4" is Canonical's key in a different menu and then using that memory elsewhere.

Agree.

> 
> This gives me a potentially cool UI idea also; since we can't trust certificate names and owners, but we _can_ trust the user, what if we let users assign names to keys? Then they could name "Key 4" something like "Canonical", and then see "Verified (Canonical)" here. They'd have to do a key fingerprint comparison and then manually name the key before that would work. Maybe this wizard won't ever show up often enough for that to be worth the trouble, but if people do end up spending a lot of time in here, that might help.

This is very similar to GPG trust levels, which I like.

Author: > rather than having to figure out that "Key 4" is Canonical's key in a different menu and then using that memory elsewhere.

Placing a fingerprint of something else would reduce readability of the mockup. `Key 4` is just a placeholder here

> They'd have to do a key fingerprint comparison and then manually name the key before that would work. Maybe this wizard won't ever show up often enough for that to be worth the trouble, but if people do end up spending a lot of time in here, that might help.

They would have to manually verify fingerprint anyways, from what I understood from other thread. We can also omit the `(Key N)` and make each bootloader entry on the list interactive, i.e. when enter is pressed, a detailed view of the bootloader is presented with key details (the fingerprint, etc.). That would be much easier.

Author: Changed this mockup to be simpler. Now only the boot option description is displayed. Once selected, detailed view is opened where key information is also provided.

| [Create Boot Entry]                                        |
+------------------------------------------------------------+
```

### 6.5 Current Boot Options

```
+------------------------------------------------------------+
|   Current Boot Options                                     |
+------------------------------------------------------------+
| Boot0000: SATA SSD #1 ESP - Verified Linux Boot            |
| Boot0001: NVMe0n1p1 - Windows Boot Manager                 |
| Boot0002: USB Drive Partition 1 - Recovery Utility         |
+------------------------------------------------------------+
```

### 6.6 Platform Key Enrollment

```
+------------------------------------------------------------+
|   Platform Key Enrollment                                  |
+------------------------------------------------------------+
| [ ] Use existing trusted key (Key 1)                       |
| [ ] Use OEM default key (PKDefault)                        |
| [ ] Load external key from ESP                             |
|                                                            |
| [Enroll Platform Key and Enable Secure Boot]               |

> +------------------------------------------------------------+

Reviewer 2: This kind of goes back to my earlier point about the PK supposedly being ephemeral, but even if we say the PK isn't ephemeral, this seems weird to me. An "existing trusted key" is going to be an OS vendor's OS signing certificate almost certainly, and from what I understand an OS key should NOT be a platform key. According to https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/windows-hardware/manufacture/desktop/windows-secure-boot-key-creation-and-management-guidance?view=windows-11, a firmware vendor is supposed to either ship a PK themselves, or use a dedicated PK provided by Microsoft that is separate from the OS signing key. Using an OS signing key as a PK seems like it could allow bad things to happen if a popular distro's OS signing key becomes compromised.

Furthermore, how would using an OS vendor's signing key as a PK even work? You need to have the private half to sign the KEK and db so that Secure Boot works at all, so unless you _are_ the OS vendor, using an existing trusted key isn't an option. Neither is using an OEM default key for that matter. The only exception to this would be if an OS provided their own entire db that was enrolled wholesale and pre-signed with a KEK that was then signed by the PK, and all three of PK, KEK, and db were provided by the OS vendor. That would go against the whole rest of the design laid out here. I feel like I must be missing something...

I would expect that if the platform key isn't ephemeral, it should at least be a dedicated key generated and controlled by the end user, separate from all other keys. How to do this in a way that a technically unskilled user will still be able to manage, I don't know for sure, though it sounded like the ephemeral PK idea was one possible solution (just generate the PK on the fly, use it to sign things in the wizard, throw the private half away, then if the user has to change their trusted keys throw away the public half of the old PK and make a new one).

Reviewer 2: Looking more closely, I think what happened is that there was a design that didn't involve ephemeral keys, and then just a bit ago Michał came up with the ephemeral key idea and integrated it into the diagrams, but it hasn't propagated everywhere yet. Like I've said elsewhere, I think the ephemeral key idea is very good and is probably how things should be done.

Author: > from what I understand an OS key should NOT be a platform key. 

Exactly, that's a bad idea.

Reviewer: > This kind of goes back to my earlier point about the PK supposedly being ephemeral, but even if we say the PK isn't ephemeral, this seems weird to me. An "existing trusted key" is going to be an OS vendor's OS signing certificate almost certainly, and from what I understand an OS key should NOT be a platform key. According to https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/windows-hardware/manufacture/desktop/windows-secure-boot-key-creation-and-management-guidance?view=windows-11, a firmware vendor is supposed to either ship a PK themselves, or use a dedicated PK provided by Microsoft that is separate from the OS signing key. Using an OS signing key as a PK seems like it could allow bad things to happen if a popular distro's OS signing key becomes compromised.

Yes, this is a bad idea:
* PK - is to establish trust between the platform owner (who is the subject of discussion, but in FOSS philosophy, it is the organization or individual who is the legal owner of the hardware) and firmware,
* KEK - is to establish trust between firmware and OS - here is place for OS vendor keys

Despite that fact in reality some hardware OEMs fix PKFail issue by making Microsoft a platform owner.

> I would expect that if the platform key isn't ephemeral, it should at least be a dedicated key generated and controlled by the end user, separate from all other keys. How to do this in a way that a technically unskilled user will still be able to manage, I don't know for sure, though it sounded like the ephemeral PK idea was one possible solution (just generate the PK on the fly, use it to sign things in the wizard, throw the private half away, then if the user has to change their trusted keys throw away the public half of the old PK and make a new one).

This may open the door to future 2FA for BIOS setup and similar features, as well as Nitrokey HSM USB for signing approved bootloaders and/or adding its hash/signatures to db.

Author: Ephemeral key concept has been added, so this mockup has been removed entirely.

2FA for BIOS was added as future idea.

```

### 6.7 Device Name Resolution

To render human-readable disk and partition identifiers, the application
extracts metadata using UEFI protocols. During device enumeration, the
application:

1. Uses `EFI_DEVICE_PATH_PROTOCOL` to resolve device paths for bootloaders
   and certificates.

2. Uses `EFI_BLOCK_IO_PROTOCOL` to obtain disk metadata such as:

   * Partition number
   * Media label or GUID (if available)
   * Removability status

3. Derives friendly names from device path nodes:

   * For NVMe devices: extract namespace ID and format as `NVMe0n1` or similar
   * For SATA/ATA: match controller and port, e.g., `SATA SSD #1`
   * For USB: format as `USB Drive` or append device serial if known

The application combines this data to generate labels like:

* `Samsung SSD 980 1TB Partition 1`
* `eMMc Device Partition 1`
* `USB SanDisk 3.2Gen1 Partition 1`

> These identifiers are shown consistently throughout the UI in bootloader
> and certificate listings, helping users make more informed trust decisions. in bootloader
> and certificate listings, helping users make more informed trust decisions.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
These identifiers are shown consistently throughout the UI in bootloader
and certificate listings, helping users make more informed trust decisions.
```

Author: Some missclick happened. Fixed. Thanks

* Section 32: Secure Boot and Authenticated Variables
* Section 3: Boot Services
* Section 2.3: Calling Conventions (for architecture compliance)
* Platform Initialization (PI) Specification regarding `EFI_BOOT_MODE`

The application is initially validated for `amd64` platforms, but the design
is portable across all UEFI-defined architectures.

## 8. Security Considerations

Not every combination of components in the boot chain may provide secure
solution maintaining the chain of trust. Example flows for the most popular
Linux distributions booting methods have been shown below with possible risks.

1. Booting GRUB:

  GRUB may break the chain of trust being unable to verify initrd. The Linux
  kernel has to enabled EFI stub. Passing command line parameters is
  questionable without UKI.

  ![](images/booting_grub.png)

2. Booting Shim:

  Shim introduces another trust anchor and implicitly adds distro key to its
  own trusted key database. As it breaks the principle of not trusting any key
  without user's consent, considering the shim inside the application should
  be prohibited. However, the chain of trust is maintained by GRUB using shim

>   protocol.

Reviewer 2: I'm not sure we should be preventing the user from booting a shim, which I *think* is what this section is recommending. I might be misunderstanding, but assuming my understanding is correct:

* Philosophically, once the user chooses a signed executable to boot and the firmware boots it, the firmware's job is done and anything further as far as Secure Boot verification is no longer our responsibility. Not offering certain bootloaders to the user because they're known to introduce another key into the trust process seems like an unreasonable restriction.
* Practically:
  * This isn't going to actually work to avoid breaking the principle of not trusting any key without the user's consent. A distro could easily do any number of different things to introduce a new key into the trust flow, including naming `shimx64.efi` something else, shipping a custom shim not based on the rhboot shim, embedding a key into the Linux kernel that the kernel would then use to verify a "real" kernel image before it kexec'd into it, etc., etc. Once the user chooses to trust an OS vendor's key and boot a bootloader signed with that key, they've just handed over control of the system to that OS vendor, and there's nothing we can (or should) do to stop that.
  * AIUI, cutting shim out of the boot process will introduce problems for people who are using machine owner keys for self-signed drivers while trusting a distro's signing key for the bootloader and kernel image.

Author: It all boils down to a question where we put the boundary for the application. How far should it care what is booted in terms of chain of trust?

The application is supposed to verify that the bootloader is signed properly and that's it. What happens later is a it out of scope of the application. If otherwise, the application would have to incorporate some convoluted logic and parsing of the bootloaders to detect what it is, whether it introduces some keys, what other components does it load, etc.

Reviewer: > It all boils down to a question where we put the boundary for the application. How far should it care what is booted in terms of chain of trust?
> 
> The application is supposed to verify that the bootloader is signed properly and that's it. What happens later is a it out of scope of the application. If otherwise, the application would have o incorporate some convoluted logic and parsing of the bootloaders to detect what it is, whether it introduces some keys, what other components does it load, etc.

Agree. We should clearly state where the application is out of scope. The problem is that some configurations are not bootable, e.g., GRUB without the shim. Then the question is what application should do, or even if it should do anything with that?  We should at least have a recovery path to some known good state that is easy to use.

Reviewer 2: > Agree. We should clearly state where the application is out of scope. The problem is that some configurations are not bootable, e.g., GRUB without the shim. Then the question is what application should do, or even if it should do anything with that? We should at least have a recovery path to some known good state that is easy to use.

GRUB without the shim isn't really a good example because it *is* bootable, even with Secure Boot, assuming the vendor has signed it (which they have to do in order for shim to boot it). It may offer a degraded experience if MOKs come into the picture, but it is bootable at least.

IMO the "what to do if the user tries to boot something that isn't bootable" question is out of scope for the application. If something is an EFI executable, it's bootable with Secure Boot, since either it will be signed by a key the user can trust, or the user can trust the bootloader's file hash if it isn't signed or there's no key available for it. What the EFI executable does thereafter isn't our concern, the user will have to figure that out, and if the EFI executable legitimately fails to boot or exits early enough, it will fall back into some earlier part of the firmware as I understand it (i.e. so the firmware can try the next boot entry or re-present the boot menu to the user). The OS vendor should be using whatever prioritization mechanism we come up with to make sure useful bootloaders (shim, GRUB) end up at the top and generally non-useful ones (memtest, MokManager, fbx) end up at the bottom.

Author: Allright. In the Security Model section I have explicitly stated that the application cares only about verifying the bootloaders and it is bootloader's responsibility to continue chain of trust.

I have left the Security Considerations section where the diargams with popular Linxu booting methods are shown. If unneeded, it may be dropped.

user whether to trust the key used to sign the selected image in the boot
options. The image may have been explicitly selected by a user in a firmware
boot menu, or it may have been automatically selected by the firmware during
normal bootup.

The boot options created by the firmware may not always be Sovereign Boot
compatible (signed by keys different than Microsoft's) thus they may not be
showed up for trust decisions. That is why the application does additional
scanning for potential boot options and bootloaders on available EFI System
Partitions. If a hypothetical Sovereign Boot compatible EFI image is found, it
is presented to the user for trust decision.

1. The application will prioritize `shimx64.efi` files, as `shim` is required
   to maintain the UEFI Secure Boot verification.
2. Additionally the application may look at `BOOT.CSV` file accompanying the
   `shimx64.efi` in search for fallback boot options for given distribution.
3. At last the application will list other EFI executables discovered on the
   EFI System Partitions that were not yet listed.
4. From the list of all boot option and bootloaders, those signed by

>    Microsoft's keys will be filtered out and skipped form trust prompts.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
   Microsoft's keys will be filtered out and skipped from trust prompts.
```

Once the trusted key database is configured, the application creates an
ephemeral Platform Key `PK`, discards its private part, and enrolls the public
part into `PK` variable to activate UEFI Secure Boot. The application
transitions the system into an provisioned state and proceeds with booting the
trusted image.

Only after the UEFI Secure Boot environment is provisioned and a Platform Key
is set does the application default to the interactive menu interface on
subsequent application invocations. This ensures a streamlined initial
experience focused on system provisioning, while providing full transparency
and control afterward.

The interactive menu interface is designed to provide detailed view on current
system environment:

> - All discovered and Sovereign Boot compatible boot options and
>   their:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- All discovered and Sovereign Boot compatible boot options and their:
```

# Soverign Boot Provisioning Wizard

## 1. Introduction

This document specifies the behavior and architecture of a UEFI application
designed to guide end users through the provisioning of UEFI Secure Boot. The
objective is to offer a user-controllable mechanism for managing platform
trust relationships and establishing UEFI Secure Boot infrastructure, with a
primary focus on transparency, informed consent, and usability.

Unlike traditional firmware interfaces, which expose UEFI Secure Boot as a
collection of loosely connected toggleable settings and unmanaged certificate
stores, this application presents a coherent, wizard-like experience. Its
purpose is to make the process of reviewing and enrolling platform keys
intuitive for users who are not security experts.

## 2. Application Design Overview

The Soverign Boot Provisioning Wizard is a standalone UEFI application

> executed either from a system firmware image. It operates in the pre-boot UEFI

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
executed from a system firmware image. It operates in the pre-boot UEFI
```

Unless we want the application to be installable as a binary on the disk - I don't think we should allow this (or at least we shouldn't encourage it), since the application will end up relying on a Dasharo-specific mechanism for wiping the PK, and people may get confused if they try to use the application with other firmwares.

Author: Applied: 164d282

Author: Generally it would be possible to run it from the disk. But it will worky only with EDK2-based firmware. If we need to restrict it, we can add such information to the spec. but we already explicitly say that it is executed from system firmware image.

Reviewer 2: Makes sense to me, I'm happy with that.

Reviewer: @ArrayBolt3, please resolve conversations where you are happy with the provided solution, so we can finalize this PR one by one and finally get your approval.

Reviewer 2: @pietrushnic Only @miczyg1 can do that I believe, Github does not provide me a "resolve conversation" button.

Reviewer: ![brave_screenshot_github com](https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/2efd5f88-3af3-42ae-9cf0-1b9ba137696d)

I guess that is your privilege to this repo. Let me try to address that.

Reviewer: @ArrayBolt3, invitation sent. I guess the Triage level should give you PR level rights.

Reviewer 2: Just accepted, but no button here:

![Screenshot_20250620_162001](https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/b5252bd2-b35b-4c58-8fb3-7e5db60c5cfb)

Reviewer: @ArrayBolt3 very weird from the GH side, but you need write access or be the author of the PR to resolve conversations. It should be possible to resolve conversations at the Triage level, as pointed out by community requests to GH, but apparently, this has not yet been approved as a valid use case. Anyway, I was raised with your and @adrelanos privilege to this repo to Write so that you can resolve conversations.

Reviewer 2: I finally see the button now. Thank you!

environment, executing on first boot, or on `EFI_BOOT_MODE` set to
`BOOT_WITH_DEFAULT_SETTINGS` or `BOOT_WITH_MFG_MODE_SETTINGS`, or as a
fallback mechanism when UEFI Secure Boot verification fails on subsequent

> boots.

Reviewer 2: I think we agree that, during a normal bootup (not first time boot), when there are boot entries present for UEFI to work through, it should use the normal behavior of trying to verify and boot each entry until one works. But what should happen if the user explicitly goes out of their way to attempt to boot an untrusted bootloader (i.e. drops to a boot menu and selects a boot entry pointing to an untrusted binary, or uses "boot from file" and selects an untrusted binary)? I think if that happens, the wizard should be invoked and immediately show a trust prompt just for that one specific binary, adding it as trusted and booting it if the user chooses to trust it, or taking the user back to the boot menu (or "boot from file" menu) if the user chooses to not trust it.

This might already be implied by this snippet of the spec, but if not, it might be good to specify that somewhere.

Also, am I correct in believing that the application only executes *by default* on first boot or in `BOOT_WITH_DEFAULT_SETTINGS` or `BOOT_WITH_MFG_MODE_SETTINGS` modes, but that the user *can* execute it at other times as well? I get the impression that when booted in one of these special modes, it resets Secure Boot provisioning entirely, but that if started at other times, it augments the existing Secure Boot settings with the user's choices.

Author: > Also, am I correct in believing that the application only executes by default on first boot or in BOOT_WITH_DEFAULT_SETTINGS or BOOT_WITH_MFG_MODE_SETTINGS modes, but that the user can execute it at other times as well?

We thought about adding a menu entry in e.g. Secure Boot menu to launch the wizard explicilty.

> I get the impression that when booted in one of these special modes, it resets Secure Boot provisioning entirely, but that if started at other times, it augments the existing Secure Boot settings with the user's choices.

In these modes all settings are reset to defaults, so we are back to what firmware provides by default and our custom Soverign Boot settings are gone, thus the wizard is launched. And yes, if started at other times, it just augements/modifies existing settings.

Author: @ArrayBolt3 anything to add here?

Reviewer 2: I'm still not clear on whether or not the wizard will appear if the user explicitly tries to boot something untrusted, but I guess since they will be able to launch the wizard themselves, it doesn't really matter. So no, I'm happy to resolve this.

Author: ```
It operates in the pre-boot UEFI
environment, executing on first boot, or on `EFI_BOOT_MODE` set to
`BOOT_WITH_DEFAULT_SETTINGS` or `BOOT_WITH_MFG_MODE_SETTINGS`, or as a
fallback mechanism when UEFI Secure Boot verification fails on subsequent
boots.
```

In the spec we already say that wizard runs if `UEFI Secure Boot verification fails`, so essentially an attempt to run an untrusted or unsigned image occurred, so wizard is launched.

Can be also run manually from the Secure Boot menu.

Reviewer 2: Perfect.

Upon launch, the application initializes required protocols and services,
including but not limited to:

* `EFI_SIMPLE_FILE_SYSTEM_PROTOCOL` for accessing ESPs
* `EFI_LOADED_IMAGE_PROTOCOL` for self-inspection
* `EFI_VARIABLE_SERVICES_PROTOCOL` for interaction with UEFI Secure Boot
  variables and boot option configuration
* `EFI_SECURITY_ARCH_PROTOCOL`/`EFI_SECURITY2_ARCH_PROTOCOL` for verifying
  images via `EFI_BOOT_SERVICES.LoadImage()`

The application executes in several stages, forming a wizard workflow. These
stages include environment scanning, key discovery, signature validation,
and key enrollment.

![](images/app_flow.png)

On first launch or during boot with default settings, the application ensures
that UEFI Secure Boot is in setup mode, and if not it deletes current Platform
Key `PK` using the platform-specific method. While in Setup Mode, the
application removes Key Exchange Keys and trusted signature database `db` to
guarantee a clean state for establishing trust.

In the next phase the application analyzes boot options, prompts the user

> whether to trust they key used to sign the image in the boot option.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
In the next phase the application analyzes boot options, prompting the user
whether to trust the key used to sign the selected image in the boot options.
The image may have been explicitly selected by a user in a firmware boot menu,
or it may have been automatically selected by the firmware during normal
bootup.
```

Author: Applied: 164d282

Once trusted key database is configured, the application creates ephemeral

> Platform Key `PK`, discards its private part, and enrolls the public part into

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Once the trusted key database is configured, the application creates an ephemeral
Platform Key `PK`, discards its private part, and enrolls the public part into
```

Author: Applied: 164d282

`PK` variable to activate UEFI Secure Boot.

Only after the UEFI Secure Boot environment is provisioned and a Platform Key
is set does the application default to the interactive menu interface on
subsequent invocations. This ensures a streamlined initial experience focused
on system provisioning, while providing full transparency and control
afterward.

The interactive menu interface is designed to provide detailed view on current
system environment:

- Current boot options and their:
  - Verification status

>   - Key fingerprint if the image is signed

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  - Key fingerprint if the image is signed (or image hash if not signed)
```

Author: Applied: 164d282

>   - Key trust status

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  - Trust status
```

(Since a hash might be trusted instead of a key.)

Author: Applied: 164d282

- Current trusted key database

As well as options for Soverign Boot reprovisioning.

## 3. Operational Phases

### 3.1 Environment Initialization

The application can only run before `EFI_BOOT_SERVICES.ExitBootServices()` has
been called.

The application locates all necessary protocols for its operation:

- HOB list (for `EFI_BOOT_MODE` information)
- Boot Services (for `LoadImage` and `StartImage` and possibly other API)
- Runtime Services (for Variable services and possibly other API)
- crypto libraries (for parsing the certificates and signature verification in
  the images)

The application also consults the `Boot####` and `BootOrder` variables to
determine the available boot options and priority of bootloader processing.

If the application is run after initial provisioning, it will read out current
`PK` and `db` and parse its content.

### 3.3 Bootloader Identification and Verification

The application will parse the images of the bootloaders to obtain information
about the signatures. The application will additionally validate bootloaders

> using cyrptographic libraries. Bootloaders that pass signature checks using

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
using cryptographic libraries. Bootloaders that pass signature checks
```

Author: Applied: 164d282

are listed for potential trust decisions. For images with unknown but
verifiable keys, the application initiates a trust prompt.

The priority of bootloader processing is determined by `BootOrder` variable
prepared by the firmware before launching the application.

The information about the bootloader should include:

* The EFI image device path
* Status of image verification
* Associated certificates/keys fingerprints

### 3.4 Trust Decision and Key Enrollment

The application parses the certificates embedded inside the PE/COFF image
format as described in the UEFI specification. For each newly encountered
signing key fingerprint/certificate discovered during bootloader verification,
the application prompts the user whether to trust the key/certificate. The
prompt must include the key/certificate fingerprint. The prompt may display

> additional information:

Reviewer 2: "newly encountered" - this implies that if the user chooses to distrust a key, the info about that key and the fact that it is distrusted will be stored somewhere? That sounds useful to keep a user from being re-prompted to trust a key they chose to not trust multiple times, but should be spelled out if that's what we're doing.

Author: Yes, the information about distrusted keys is stored as a UEFI variable. Then if the wizard is launched again and user would like to modify policies, they may see that they previously distrusted the key and can change their decision.

The idea was to avoid multiple prompts for the same key over and over.

Author: Now, should we add these untrusted keys to DBX (forbidden signatures database) or simply leave them "internally" untrusted but subject to eventual future change of mind? @ArrayBolt3

Reviewer 2: Using the DBX sounds like a good idea to me. The user can change their mind even if using the DBX, right?

Reviewer 2: Assuming the user can change their mind later if we're using the DBX, I'm satisfied with this.

Author: >  The user can change their mind even if using the DBX, right?

Yes, they can, however that may not necessarily be a good idea.

Given that the wizard will not touch DBX (because it may contain important security mitigations for buggy or insecure images or keys), this database will be shared with what UEFI forum provides as default and recommended DBX. Fortunately, the EDK2 sees the default DBX as a single signature list containing all forbidden hashes, and adding new forbidden hashes creates a next signature list. The wizard may simply skip the first signature list assuming it is the golden one from UEFI forum, and just look at all other signature lists assuming they were added by the user.

I think that should help with maintaining the DBX properly if we are going to use it.

Reviewer 2: Fair, that makes sense to me.

* Certificate subject (if available)
* Certificate issuer fields (if available)

With explicit user consent and double confirmation, the application enrolls
the certificate fingerprint into the trusted signature database `db` using
`SetVariable()`. Since the application operates in UEFI Secure Boot Setup Mode
at this point, authenticated write access is not required.

If the bootloader has more than one signature, the application will prompt to
trust each unique key found in the image, for which trust decision was not yet
made. The application will stop prompting on the first key/certificate that
the user decides to trust for given bootloader.

If the bootloader is signed only by Microsoft keys/certificates the trust
prompt is deferred for later and the application attemps to process next
bootloader if available. Trust prompt for Microsoft keys/certificates has the
lowest priority (ignoring `BootOrder`) in such case. The application will scan
the current partition for files that may be alternative usable bootloaders. It
searches recursively for files using simple heuristics, such as file name:
`bootx64.efi`, `elilo.efi`, `grubx64.efi`, `shimx64.efi` and `bootmgfw.efi` or

> `.efi` file extension matching. If any of the files contains a signature not

Reviewer 2: Could we add the BOOT.CSV parsing here?

Author: Added: 164d282

made by Microsoft keys, they are prioritized for trust prompts. Once all other
options are exhausted, the application will prompt to trust the Microsoft
keys/certificates if any bootloaders signed by them are found.

The application may continue booting the currently processed bootloader or
proceed to check next bootloader and continue with trust prompts until all
options are exhausted or user decides to continue booting.

Only the `db` (permitted image signers) may be updated during this phase. No
changes to `PK` are performed until the end of the provisioning workflow. This
restriction ensures that the platform's trust anchors and ownership state are
not altered prematurely.

At the end of the provisioning workflow (once trusted key database is

> configured), the application creates ephemeral Platform Key `PK`, discards its

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
configured), the application creates an ephemeral Platform Key `PK`, discards its
```

Author: Applied: 164d282

private part, and enrolls the public part into `PK` variable. Enrolling the
`PK` while UEFI Secure Boot is in Setup Mode will cause the firmware to
transition the UEFI Secure Boot to User Mode and activate enforced image
verification (enable UEFI Secure Boot).

### 3.5 Boot Option Modifications

When trusted key database is configured. `PK` is enrolled and UEFI Secure Boot
is enabled, the application will proceed with booting the selected option.
However, if user chose to trust a key/certificate of an option that was not the
top priority in the `BootOrder` variable, the application will update the
`BootOrder` variable to ensure the trusted bootloader is prioritized
appropriately.

When the application is not launched for the first time, it is in the
interactive menu mode. The menu may offer a possibility to add new options
from discovered bootloaders and modify bootorder if the user decides to extend
the trusted key database by new keys/certificate or bootloaders.

## 4. Security Model

The application adheres to the security model defined in the UEFI Secure Boot
architecture. The application is designed with adhering to the following
rules:

> * No key is trusted without explicit user action. The rule applies only to the
>   bootloader executed directly by the application. If the bootloader
>   introduces another key into the trust chain, it is out of scope of the
>   application.

Reviewer 2: Some of this is redundant with the third bullet point.

```suggestion
* No key is trusted without explicit user action. The rule applies only to the
  bootloader executed directly by the application.
```

Author: ```suggestion
* No key is trusted without explicit user action. The rule applies only to the
  bootloader executed directly by the application or firmware.
```

Once we are provisioned, we can leave the booting process to the firmware, so the firmware will be booting the entry next time.

Author: Applied: 164d282

> * Bootloaders are not executed unless validated against an enrolled key and
>   authorized by the user.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* Bootloaders are not executed unless validated against an enrolled key or
  hash and authorized by the user.
```

Author: Applied: 164d282

  verifying the bootloader directly executed by the application. Further chain
  of trust continuation is the bootloader's responsibility and is out of scope
  of the application.
* The application is not responsible for protecting UEFI Secure Boot
  configuration. Unauthorized modifications to Secure Boot via firmware setup
  should be prevent with firmware setup password feature.

## 5. Integration Considerations

This application is a standard UEFI application and must be deployed as an
executable PE32+ image conforming to the UEFI application format. It shall
reside integrated into the firmware volume to ensure it is always available.

Firmware implementations are encouraged to invoke the wizard:

* On first boot
* When `EFI_BOOT_MODE == BOOT_WITH_DEFAULT_SETTINGS`
* When UEFI Secure Boot verification fails of the previously trusted
  bootloader
* By Boot Manager when none of the boot options work. If there are no boot
  options on disks, then the firmware should fall back to firmware setup or
  any other platform-specific fallback boot option.
* Manually by the firmware through the firmware setup menu if user requests to
  do so.

> 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* If the user explicitly attempts to boot a bootloader that is not yet trusted via
  the boot menu or "boot from file" functionality.

```

Author: Applied: 164d282

|       Confirm Trust Decision for Key Fingerprint           |
+------------------------------------------------------------+
|                                                            |
|   Fingerprint (SHA-256):                                   |
|   AB34EF...                                                |
|                                                            |
|   Are you sure you want to trust this key?                 |
|   This will allow the system to boot and save the key.     |
|                                                            |
+------------------------------------------------------------+
|                                                            |
| > Yes, Trust This Key                                      |
| > No, Go Back                                              |
|                                                            |
+------------------------------------------------------------+
|   Use ↑↓ to navigate.                                      |
|   Use Enter to confirm selection.                          |
|   Use ESC to go back to previous menu.                     |
+------------------------------------------------------------+

> 

Reviewer 2: This mockup is missing Markdown code fences.

Author: Fixed: 164d282
